README.md, before:

> ⚠️ **WARNING: Work In Progress**
>
> This repository is currently under active development. The documentation is incomplete and subject to change. Features, code, and instructions may not work as intended. Use at your own risk!

# PowerBicep PowerShell Module

This module enables you to leverage the advantages of deploying your infrastructure with Bicep, using your existing PowerShell skills.

## Table of Contents

- [PowerBicep PowerShell Module](#powerbicep-powershell-module)
- [Advantages](#advantages)
- [Installation](#installation)
    - [Prerequisities](#prerequisities)
    - [Instructions](#instructions)
- [Cmdlets](#network-cmdlets)
    - [Network](#network-cmdlets)
        - [New-PBIsolatedVirtualNetwork](#new-pbisolatedvirtualnetwork)
        - [New-PBSpokeVirtualNetwork](#new-pbspokevirtualnetwork)
        - [New-PBHubVirtualNetwork](#new-pbhubvirtualnetwork)
- [See Also](#see-also)

## Advantages
|                      |                 |
|-----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Simplicity        | Deploy complex Azure infrastructure using simple PowerShell commands.                                                |
| Comply with Microsoft best practices    | All templates are designed according to Microsoft best practices, using the Well-Architected Framework.              |
| No Bicep knowledge needed             |  You get the advantages of Bicep without having to learn a new language/skill          |
| Parameter minimization            | Commands automatically discover and use existing resources via Azure Resource Graph, reducing required parameters. |
| Protect against manual changes | This module uses deployment stacks and you can enable deny assignments to prevent manual changes. |

# Installation

## Prerequisities
- Azure PowerShell must be installed on your system. Please follow [these instructions](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/azure/install-azure-powershell?view=azps-14.4.0) to install it.
- Bicep CLI must be installed on your system. Please follow [these instructions](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-resource-manager/bicep/install) to install it.
- Download or clone this repository to your device

## Instructions

1. Open PowerShell and navigate to the location of this repository on your local computer
    ```powershell
    cd <path to the downloaded PowerBicep folder>
    ```
2. Import the module

    ```powershell
    Import-Module ./PowerBicep.psm1
    ```

# Network cmdlets

## New-PBIsolatedVirtualNetwork

Creates an isolated virtual network with automated subnet allocation and input validation.

### Syntax

```powershell
New-PBIsolatedVirtualNetwork
    -ApplicationNameShort <string>
    -Environment <string>
    -Location <string>
    -AddressPrefix <string>
    [-Index <string>]
    [-Tags <object>]
    [-Subnets <hashtable>]
    [-DenyManualChanges]
    [-Force]
    [-AcceptOverlappingIpAddresses]
```

### Description

Creates an Azure virtual network without hub connection, automatically allocates subnets and checks if there are virtual networks with overlapping IP-Ranges.

### Parameters

| Name                        | Type      | Description                                                                                  | Required | Default         |
|-----------------------------|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------|
| ApplicationNameShort        | string    | Short name for the application                                                              | Yes      |                 |
| Environment                 | string    | Environment name (e.g., dev, prod)                                                          | Yes      |                 |
| Location                    | string    | Azure region  (e.g., westeurope, germanywestcentral)                                                                            | Yes      |                 |
| AddressPrefix               | string    | VNet address prefix (e.g., 192.168.0.0/24)                                                  | Yes      |                 |
| Index                       | string    | Resource index                                                                             | No       | '001'           |
| Tags                        | object    | Tags to apply to resources                                                                  | No       | @{}             |
| Subnets                     | hashtable | Subnet definitions using **name=size** (e.g., @{subnet1=26; subnet2=27})                                       | No       | @{}             |
| DenyManualChanges           | switch    | Deny manual changes to resources                                                            | No       |                 |
| Force                       | switch    | Ignores approval prompts                                                   | No       |                 |
| AcceptOverlappingIpAddresses| switch    | Allow the virtual networks address space to overlap with other virtual networks. <span style="color:red">**This may cause issues, if you decide to peer this network with the hub in the future!**</span>                                                                                | No       |                 |

### Examples
1. Create a virtual network without hub connection and two subnets named "subnet1" with a subnet size of 26 and "subnet2" with a subnet size of 27.
    ```powershell
    New-PBIsolatedVirtualNetwork -ApplicationNameShort 'app' -Environment 'test' -Location 'northeurope' -AddressPrefix '10.1.0.0/16' -Subnets @{subnet1=26; subnet2=27} -Verbose
    ```

## New-PBHubVirtualNetwork

Creates a hub virtual network with optional Azure Firewall, Bastion, VPN Gateway and advanced tagging.

### Syntax

```powershell
New-PBHubVirtualNetwork
    -ApplicationNameShort <string>
    -Environment <string>
    -Location <string>
    -AddressPrefix <string>
    [-Index <string>]
    [-Tags <object>]
    [-DenyManualChanges]
    [-Force]
    [-DeployAzureFirewall]
    [-AzureFirewallSku <string>]
    [-AzureFirewallAllowOutboundInternetAccess]
    [-DeployAzureBastion]
    [-AzureBastionSku <string>]
    [-DeployAzureVpnGateway]
```

### Description

Creates a hub VNet in Azure, with options to deploy Azure Firewall, Bastion, VPN Gateway, and Entra Private Access. Automatically tags resources, allocates required subnets, and supports deployment stacks.

### Parameters

| Name                   | Type      | Description                                                                                  | Required | Default         |
|------------------------|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------|
| ApplicationNameShort   | string    | Short name for the application.                                                              | Yes      | 'hub'           |
| Environment            | string    | Environment name (e.g., dev, prod).                                                          | Yes      |                 |
| Location               | string    | Azure region.                                                                                | Yes      |                 |
| AddressPrefix          | string    | VNet address prefix (e.g., 10.0.0.0/16).                                                     | Yes      |                 |
| Index                  | string    | Resource index.                                                                              | No       | '001'           |
| Tags                   | object    | Tags to apply to resources.                                                                  | No       | @{}             |
| DenyManualChanges      | switch    | Deny manual changes to resources.                                                            | No       |                 |
| Force                  | switch    | Forces deployment using deployment stack.                                                    | No       |                 |
| DeployAzureFirewall    | switch    | Deploy Azure Firewall in the hub VNet.                                                       | No       |                 |
| AzureFirewallSku       | string    | Azure Firewall SKU ('Basic', 'Standard', 'Premium').                                         | No       |                 |
| AzureFirewallAllowOutboundInternetAccess | switch    | When set enables outbound access on Port 443 for all protected networks    | No       |                 |
| DeployAzureBastion     | switch    | Deploy Azure Bastion in the hub VNet.                                                        | No       |                 |
| AzureBastionSku        | string    | Azure Bastion SKU ('Basic', 'Standard', 'Premium').                                          | No       | 'Basic'         |
| DeployAzureVpnGateway  | switch    | Deploy Azure VPN Gateway in the hub VNet.                                                    | No       |                 |

### Examples

1. Deploy a hub network with Azure Firewall
    ```powershell
    New-PBHubVirtualNetwork -Environment 'prod' -Location 'westeurope' -AddressPrefix '10.0.0.0/16' -DeployAzureFirewall -AzureFirewallSku 'Standard'
    ```
1. Deploy a hub network with Bastion
    ```powershell
    New-PBHubVirtualNetwork -Environment 'prod' -Location 'westeurope' -AddressPrefix '10.0.0.0/16' -DeployAzureBastion -AzureBastionSku 'Standard'
    ```

## New-PBSpokeVirtualNetwork

### Description

Creates an Azure virtual network with hub connection, automatically allocates subnets, detects overlapping IPs, and implements routing over the hubs NVA or (if no NVA is available) creates a NAT gateway for outbound internet access.

#### Routing

Creates a spoke virtual network with automated subnet allocation, hub connection, overlapping IP detectionand routing.

### Syntax

```powershell
New-PBSpokeVirtualNetwork
    -ApplicationNameShort <string>
    -Environment <string>
    -Location <string>
    -AddressPrefix <string>
    [-Index <string>]
    [-Tags <object>]
    [-Subnets <hashtable>]
    [-DenyManualChanges]
    [-Force]
    [-AcceptOverlappingIpAddresses]
    [-HubNetworkLocation <string>]
```



### Parameters

| Name                        | Type      | Description                                                                                  | Required | Default         |
|-----------------------------|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------|
| ApplicationNameShort        | string    | Short name for the application.                                                              | Yes      |                 |
| Environment                 | string    | Environment name (e.g., dev, prod).                                                          | Yes      |                 |
| Location                    | string    | Azure region.                                                                                | Yes      |                 |
| AddressPrefix               | string    | VNet address prefix (e.g., 192.168.0.0/24).                                                  | Yes      |                 |
| Index                       | string    | Resource index                                                                             | No       | '001'           |
| Tags                        | object    | Tags to apply to resources.                                                                  | No       | @{}             |
| Subnets                     | hashtable | Subnet definitions using **name=size** (e.g., @{subnet1=26; subnet2=27}).                    | No       | @{}             |
| DenyManualChanges           | switch    | Deny manual changes to resources.                                                            | No       |                 |
| Force                       | switch    | Forces deployment using deployment stack.                                                    | No       |                 |
| AcceptOverlappingIpAddresses| switch    | Allow the virtual networks address space to overlap with other virtual networks. <span style="color:red">**This will cause issues, if the overlapping network is already peered with the hub or if you decide to peer it in the future!**</span>                           | No       |                 |
| HubNetworkLocation          | string    | Location of the hub network if no hub is available in the spoke subnets region.                                        | No       |                 |

### Examples

1. Create a spoke network, that automatically connects to the available hub network in the same location
    ```powershell
    New-PBSpokeVirtualNetwork -ApplicationNameShort 'app' -Environment 'dev' -Location 'westeurope' -AddressPrefix '192.168.0.0/24' -Subnets @{subnet1=26; subnet2=27} -Verbose
    ```
2. Create a spoke network, that automatically connects to a hub network in another location
    ```powershell
    New-PBSpokeVirtualNetwork -ApplicationNameShort 'app' -Environment 'dev' -Location 'westeurope' -AddressPrefix '192.168.0.0/24' -Subnets @{subnet1=26; subnet2=27} -HubNetworkLocation 'germanywestcentral'
    ```





---

# See Also

- [Microsoft PowerShell Documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/powershell/)
- [Azure PowerShell Reference](https://docs.microsoft.com/powershell/azure/)

---

Commit message:

added dns servers and proxy and updated documentation

README.md, after:

> ⚠️ **WARNING: Work In Progress**
>
> This repository is currently under active development. The documentation is incomplete and subject to change. Features, code, and instructions may not work as intended. Use at your own risk!

# PowerBicep PowerShell Module

This module enables you to leverage the advantages of deploying your infrastructure with Bicep, using your existing PowerShell skills.

## Table of Contents

- [PowerBicep PowerShell Module](#powerbicep-powershell-module)
- [Advantages](#advantages)
- [Installation](#installation)
    - [Prerequisities](#prerequisities)
    - [Instructions](#instructions)
- [Cmdlets](#network-cmdlets)
    - [Network](#network-cmdlets)
        - [New-PBIsolatedVirtualNetwork](#new-pbisolatedvirtualnetwork)
        - [New-PBSpokeVirtualNetwork](#new-pbspokevirtualnetwork)
        - [New-PBHubVirtualNetwork](#new-pbhubvirtualnetwork)
- [See Also](#see-also)

## Advantages

| Advantage                     | Description                 |
|-----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Simplicity        | Deploy complex Azure infrastructure using simple PowerShell commands.                                                |
| Comply with Microsoft best practices    | All templates are designed according to Microsoft best practices, using the Well-Architected Framework.              |
| No Bicep knowledge needed             |  You get the advantages of Bicep without having to learn a new language/skill          |
| Parameter minimization            | Commands automatically discover and use existing resources via Azure Resource Graph, reducing required parameters. |
| Protect against manual changes | This module uses deployment stacks and you can enable deny assignments to prevent manual changes. |

# Installation

## Prerequisities
- Azure PowerShell must be installed on your system. Please follow [these instructions](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/azure/install-azure-powershell?view=azps-14.4.0) to install it.
- Bicep CLI must be installed on your system. Please follow [these instructions](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-resource-manager/bicep/install) to install it.
- Git is recommended to be installed on your system. Please follow [these instructions](https://github.com/git-guides/install-git)

    > ℹ️ **Note:**  
    > If git cannot be installed, you can download the code from this repository as a ZIP file and extract it to the target location.

## Instructions

1. Open PowerShell and navigate to the location you want to clone this repository to
    ```powershell
    cd <path to the target folder>
    ```
1. Clone this repository on your local device
    ```powershell
    git clone "https://github.com/UA-Homelab/PowerBicep.git" .
    ```
1. Import the module

    ```powershell
    Import-Module ./PowerBicep.psm1
    ```

# Network cmdlets

## New-PBIsolatedVirtualNetwork

Creates an isolated virtual network with automated subnet allocation and input validation.

### Syntax

```powershell
New-PBIsolatedVirtualNetwork
    -ApplicationNameShort <string>
    -Environment <string>
    -Location <string>
    -AddressPrefix <string>
    [-Index <string>]
    [-Tags <object>]
    [-Subnets <hashtable>]
    [-DenyManualChanges]
    [-Force]
    [-AcceptOverlappingIpAddresses]
```

### Description

Creates an Azure virtual network without hub connection, automatically allocates subnets and checks if there are virtual networks with overlapping IP-Ranges.

### Parameters

| Name                        | Type      | Description                                                                                  | Required | Default         |
|-----------------------------|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------|
| ApplicationNameShort        | string    | Short name for the application                                                              | Yes      |                 |
| Environment                 | string    | Environment name (e.g., dev, prod)                                                          | Yes      |                 |
| Location                    | string    | Azure region  (e.g., westeurope, germanywestcentral)                                                                            | Yes      |                 |
| AddressPrefix               | string    | VNet address prefix (e.g., 192.168.0.0/24)                                                  | Yes      |                 |
| Index                       | string    | Resource index                                                                             | No       | '001'           |
| Tags                        | object    | Tags to apply to resources                                                                  | No       | @{}             |
| Subnets                     | hashtable | Subnet definitions using **name=size** (e.g., @{subnet1=26; subnet2=27})                                       | No       | @{}             |
| DenyManualChanges           | switch    | Deny manual changes to resources                                                            | No       |                 |
| Force                       | switch    | Ignores approval prompts                                                   | No       |                 |
| AcceptOverlappingIpAddresses| switch    | Allow the virtual networks address space to overlap with other virtual networks. <span style="color:red">**This may cause issues, if you decide to peer this network with the hub in the future!**</span>                                                                                | No       |                 |

### Examples
1. Create a virtual network without hub connection and two subnets named "subnet1" with a subnet size of 26 and "subnet2" with a subnet size of 27.
    ```powershell
    New-PBIsolatedVirtualNetwork -ApplicationNameShort 'app' -Environment 'test' -Location 'northeurope' -AddressPrefix '10.1.0.0/16' -Subnets @{subnet1=26; subnet2=27} -Verbose
    ```

## New-PBHubVirtualNetwork

Creates a hub virtual network with optional Azure Firewall, Bastion, VPN Gateway and advanced tagging.

### Syntax

```powershell
New-PBHubVirtualNetwork
    -ApplicationNameShort <string>
    -Environment <string>
    -Location <string>
    -AddressPrefix <string>
    [-Index <string>]
    [-Tags <object>]
    [-DenyManualChanges]
    [-Force]
    [-DeployAzureFirewall]
    [-AzureFirewallSku <string>]
    [-AzureFirewallAllowOutboundInternetAccess]
    [-DeployAzureBastion]
    [-AzureBastionSku <string>]
    [-DeployAzureVpnGateway]
```

### Description

Creates a hub VNet in Azure, with options to deploy Azure Firewall, Bastion, VPN Gateway, and Entra Private Access. Automatically tags resources, allocates required subnets, and supports deployment stacks.

### Parameters

| Name                   | Type      | Description                                                                                  | Required | Default         |
|------------------------|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------|
| ApplicationNameShort   | string    | Short name for the application.                                                              | Yes      | 'hub'           |
| Environment            | string    | Environment name (e.g., dev, prod).                                                          | Yes      |                 |
| Location               | string    | Azure region.                                                                                | Yes      |                 |
| AddressPrefix          | string    | VNet address prefix (e.g., 10.0.0.0/16).                                                     | Yes      |                 |
| Index                  | string    | Resource index.                                                                              | No       | '001'           |
| Tags                   | object    | Tags to apply to resources.                                                                  | No       | @{}             |
| DenyManualChanges      | switch    | Deny manual changes to resources.                                                            | No       |                 |
| Force                  | switch    | Forces deployment using deployment stack.                                                    | No       |                 |
| DeployAzureFirewall    | switch    | Deploy Azure Firewall in the hub VNet.                                                       | No       |                 |
| AzureFirewallSku       | string    | Azure Firewall SKU ('Basic', 'Standard', 'Premium').                                         | No       |                 |
| AzureFirewallAllowOutboundInternetAccess | switch    | When set enables outbound access on Port 443 for all protected networks    | No       |                 |
| DeployAzureBastion     | switch    | Deploy Azure Bastion in the hub VNet.                                                        | No       |                 |
| AzureBastionSku        | string    | Azure Bastion SKU ('Basic', 'Standard', 'Premium').                                          | No       | 'Basic'         |
| DeployAzureVpnGateway  | switch    | Deploy Azure VPN Gateway in the hub VNet.                                                    | No       |                 |

### Examples

1. Deploy a hub network with Azure Firewall
    ```powershell
    New-PBHubVirtualNetwork -Environment 'prod' -Location 'westeurope' -AddressPrefix '10.0.0.0/16' -DeployAzureFirewall -AzureFirewallSku 'Standard'
    ```
1. Deploy a hub network with Bastion
    ```powershell
    New-PBHubVirtualNetwork -Environment 'prod' -Location 'westeurope' -AddressPrefix '10.0.0.0/16' -DeployAzureBastion -AzureBastionSku 'Standard'
    ```

## New-PBSpokeVirtualNetwork

### Description

Creates an Azure virtual network with hub connection, automatically allocates subnets, detects overlapping IPs, and implements routing over the hubs NVA or (if no NVA is available) creates a NAT gateway for outbound internet access.

#### Routing

Creates a spoke virtual network with automated subnet allocation, hub connection, overlapping IP detectionand routing.

### Syntax

```powershell
New-PBSpokeVirtualNetwork
    -ApplicationNameShort <string>
    -Environment <string>
    -Location <string>
    -AddressPrefix <string>
    [-Index <string>]
    [-Tags <object>]
    [-Subnets <hashtable>]
    [-DenyManualChanges]
    [-Force]
    [-AcceptOverlappingIpAddresses]
    [-HubNetworkLocation <string>]
    [-CustomDnsServers <array>]
```



### Parameters

| Name                        | Type      | Description                                                                                  | Required | Default         |
|-----------------------------|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------|
| ApplicationNameShort        | string    | Short name for the application.                                                              | Yes      |                 |
| Environment                 | string    | Environment name (e.g., dev, prod).                                                          | Yes      |                 |
| Location                    | string    | Azure region.                                                                                | Yes      |                 |
| AddressPrefix               | string    | VNet address prefix (e.g., 192.168.0.0/24).                                                  | Yes      |                 |
| Index                       | string    | Resource index                                                                             | No       | '001'           |
| Tags                        | object    | Tags to apply to resources.                                                                  | No       | @{}             |
| Subnets                     | hashtable | Subnet definitions using **name=size** (e.g., @{subnet1=26; subnet2=27}).                    | No       | @{}             |
| DenyManualChanges           | switch    | Deny manual changes to resources.                                                            | No       |                 |
| Force                       | switch    | Forces deployment using deployment stack.                                                    | No       |                 |
| AcceptOverlappingIpAddresses| switch    | Allow the virtual networks address space to overlap with other virtual networks. <span style="color:red">**This will cause issues, if the overlapping network is already peered with the hub or if you decide to peer it in the future!**</span>                           | No       |                 |
| HubNetworkLocation          | string    | Location of the hub network if no hub is available in the spoke subnets region.                                        | No       |                 |
| CustomDnsServers          | array    | The IPs of custom DNS servers, the spoke should use.                                            | No       | @()                |

> ℹ️ **Note:**  
> If no custom dns servers are defined and the hub was deployed with an Azure Firewall (Standard or Premium SKU), the firewall is used as DNS proxy and will forward requests to the Azure default DNS servers.  <br><br> This enables central management of Private DNS Zones, linking them to the hub network and resolving private endpoints through Azure firewall. <br><br>If you created a site-to-site VPN between Azure and your on-premises network, you can also configure conditional forwarders on your local DNS servers, pointing to the private IP of the Azure Firewall, to resolve private endpoints from your local devices.

### Examples

1. Create a spoke network, that automatically connects to the available hub network in the same location
    ```powershell
    New-PBSpokeVirtualNetwork -ApplicationNameShort 'app' -Environment 'dev' -Location 'westeurope' -AddressPrefix '192.168.0.0/24' -Subnets @{subnet1=26; subnet2=27} -Verbose
    ```
2. Create a spoke network, that automatically connects to a hub network in another location
    ```powershell
    New-PBSpokeVirtualNetwork -ApplicationNameShort 'app' -Environment 'dev' -Location 'westeurope' -AddressPrefix '192.168.0.0/24' -Subnets @{subnet1=26; subnet2=27} -HubNetworkLocation 'germanywestcentral'
    ```





---

# See Also

- [Microsoft PowerShell Documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/powershell/)
- [Azure PowerShell Reference](https://docs.microsoft.com/powershell/azure/)

---
